JUDY WOODRUFF: We return now to
the recent wave of attacks in
the Middle East.
Earlier today, the Islamic State
group posted a video calling on
Palestinians to attack
Israeli soldiers and civilians.
Meanwhile, on the ground,
tensions remain high after
a weekend of more deaths.
Special correspondent Martin
Seemungal from Jerusalem.
And a warning: This story
contains graphic images.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Israelis woke
up this morning to another
barrage of violence in the news,
a terror attack the night
before, this time at a bus
station in the southern town of
Beersheba.
An Israeli Arab veteran armed
with a pistol shot and killed an
Israeli soldier, then grabbed
his assault rifle and opened
fire, injuring several people in
the station, before being
shot and killed himself.
MICKY ROSENFELD, Israeli Police
Spokesman: We have six people
that were injured, four
of them being police officers
injured inside the Central Bus
Station.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: A security
guard at the station also shot
this man, thinking he was
a terrorist. An angry mob
attacked him while he was on the
ground. He turned out to be
innocent, an Eritrean asylum
seeker, 29-year old Haftom
Zarhum.
That fury is driven by a deep
and growing fear among Israelis.
In East Jerusalem, the
epicenter of the recent wave of
terror, police and army
continued to escalate their
security
presence, setting up roadblocks
at the exit points of several
Arab areas.
Jabel Mukaber is the most
extreme example of Israel's
determination to fight this
recent
wave of terror. There are army
checkpoints all around and they
are in the process of
building a wall to separate the
Arab village from the Jewish
neighborhoods on the other
side.
The Palestinians view the
operation as a form of
collective punishment.
Thaer Oraga says it only
makes people here angry.
THAER ORAGA, Palestinian: All
the people make attack from
Jabel Mukaber? I am guilty? I
am guilty of the attacks? No.
MAN: I don't think so, not at
all. This doesn't prevent
attacks. This just leads to
extremism,
I think. It doesn't
lead to peace.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The Jewish
town is called Armon HaNetziv.
David Dahan says the wall
and the extra security
is necessary.
DAVID DAHAN, Israel: Whatever
they need to do, they should do.
You know, if it's to check
them every morning, it's
something that should be done.
It's not optimal to live when
you
are checked every day, but if
it's good for the security, they
should do so.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The fiery
attack recently on Joseph's Tomb
near Nablus also inflamed
tensions. Some of the young
Palestinians who carried out the
attack were arrested by
Palestinian
security forces.
But Nabil Shaath, a senior
member of the ruling Fatah Party
in the West Bank, says it is
becoming
increasingly difficult to
control young Palestinians
there.
NABIL SHAATH, Former Palestinian
Foreign Minister: What can you
do? If the occupier doesn't take
the first step, there is no way
you can stop it. I am telling
you this with alarm, with
grief.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Palestinian
anger is fueled by a belief that
Israel intends to change
the status quo involving the
Al-Aqsa Mosque located in the
area Muslims call the Noble
Sanctuary. Jews call it the
Temple Mount. Jews can visit the
Temple Mount, but by agreement
cannot pray there.
Reported attempts by right-wing
Jews to pray have triggered
clashes. Israel's prime minister
has asked Jewish leaders not to
visit while tensions are high.
Dore Gold is the director
general of Israel's Foreign
Ministry with close ties to
Netanyahu.
DORE GOLD, Former Israeli
Ambassador to the United
Nations: We are not taking
measures
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque. That
is a total lie that is extremely
dangerous.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The gulf
between the Palestinian
Authority, led by Mahmoud Abbas,
and Netanyahu's
government grows
wider every day.
U.S. Secretary of State John
Kerry is now stepping in.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: You have to sit down and
talk to each other in order
to explore those kinds of
possibilities. So, I don't enter
this discussion with a specific
expectation, except to try to
understand better for all of us.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Kerry is
expected to meet Netanyahu in
Germany on Thursday, and Abbas
in Jordan over the weekend.
Reporting from Jerusalem, I'm
Martin Seemungal for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: It's the week of
the: Will he or won't he? Will
Vice President Joe Biden
run? Will Republican Paul Ryan
enter the fray to be speaker of
the House?
To discuss all that and more, we
turn to Politics Monday, Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report.
So, I'm going to put it all in
front of you here. Start of Joe
Biden. What do we know?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: I don't think that
anybody knows anything, and
that's
the reality.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
AMY WALTER: OK?
I think, if I could just boil it
down to the way I'm looking at
both of these, is, one
I think is much more
consequential than the other.
And that is Paul Ryan's
decision, a
go or no-go. And what I am
hearing more and more of is a
pessimism among Republicans,
that they don't think he is
going to do this job. It's a
thankless job. And they don't
think he is going to be able to
get the entire Republican
Conference around him to support
him.
What does this mean? This means
that the Republican Conference
is now officially ungovernable,
that there is a risk now that it
may not ever be able to be
fixed, that we have two big
deadlines coming up very soon,
the debt ceiling, highway
transportation bill, real stuff,
real
big, consequential stuff, with a
Republican Conference in the
House that nobody can lead.
GWEN IFILL: Interestingly
enough, in the Hillary camp,
which you cover, Tamara, there
has been
more and more of those, Joe
Biden has got to make up his
mind, Joe Biden has got to
-- he should make up his mind.
Are they nervous or are they
just assuming that they know the
answer and they just want
him to get on with it?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Last I checked, I don't
think they think they know
the answer either.
This is just one of those things
where, this has been dragging on
for months now. We have
had heightened Joe Biden
awareness back in August. And
now we're in this new flurry of
leaks and non-leaks and people
close to Joe Biden say yes and
people close to Joe Biden
say no. And off the record,
people say it's all wrong.
This is just -- I think a lot of
people, including people in the
Clinton campaign, would just
like the wondering to be done.
GWEN IFILL: One
way or the other.
AMY WALTER: One
GWEN IFILL: I agree with that.
It would be nice not to talk
about this one more week.
AMY WALTER: The hardest thing, I
think, for her is that it is
probably having an impact
on fund-raising.
There are a bunch of people
sitting on their checkbooks
saying, listen, I'm not going to
write a check until I know
what Biden is actually doing.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's talk
about other things having an
impact on the campaign.
We're expecting on Thursday for
Hillary Clinton to finally
testify in front of the Benghazi
Committee. There has been quite
a dust-up in the days leading up
to that between the
committee chairman, the ranking
Democrat, basically disagreeing
about what the purpose
of this is. And Hillary Clinton
is happy to jump on board.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
For the first time in a long
time, Hillary Clinton is now on
the offense. When this first
came up, we thought, OK, this is
going to be a very tough day for
Hillary Clinton. We're
going to talk a lot about
e-mail. She is going to be put
on the defensive. Republicans
now
are going to be able to get at
her in a way that they haven't
before.
And now it's been turned
completely around, that it's
Republicans now on the
defensive.
GWEN IFILL: One of the things I
noticed, that put out like a
five-minute video today in
which she touted her time as
secretary of state, what an
effective secretary of state
she was. We're watching a
little bit of it here.
Is that part of the
offense, Tamara?
TAMARA KEITH: I think she goes
in there and she acts like
secretary of state. She is the
stateswoman. She has to be very
careful in that hearing not to
come off as dismissive,
even though she thinks that
it is a partisan witch-hunt.
She has to come in there and
take it very seriously. And the
challenge for her is, this
could be six or eight hours'
long. You think that Republican
debate at three hours was
a long time?
GWEN IFILL: Wow.
TAMARA KEITH: Try a daylong
hearing, multiple rounds of
questioning, on a whole range of
areas, not just the Benghazi
attack. It is going -- it's
going to be a marathon. And,
by the end of the day, she, like
any other human being, is likely
to be tired. And the
pressure is still going to be
on her to be statesmanlike.
GWEN IFILL: Two more
things I want to get to.
One is the latest dust-up
between Donald Trump and Jeb
Bush about who was responsible
for
9/11, whether he was blaming
Jeb Bush's brother George W.
What is that about? What
is driving that dispute?
AMY WALTER: What is driving that
is Donald Trump. Donald Trump's
campaign is all about
his ability to get
media attention.
And the way he gets media
attention is, he says something
dramatic or he attacks somebody.
The media covers it. Then the
media asks his opponent to
respond to it. And that person
respond. And then we
go back and around.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Ah.
AMY WALTER: And guess who wins
on that? Donald Trump, every
single time.
And that's why I think Jeb Bush
jumping into this, both over
Twitter and then in the media,
is a mistake. If you are on
Donald Trump's territory, you
are going to lose. If you are
fighting your campaign on your
territory, you are more likely
to win that fight.
GWEN IFILL: One more thing.
So, Saturday nation, we saw --
we wait for "Saturday Night
Live" during a campaign season
just to see what they are going
to do with the people we cover
every day. And this was
what they did with
Bernie Sanders.
LARRY DAVID, Actor:
We're doomed.
(LAUGHTER)
LARRY DAVID: We need a
revolution, millions of people
on the streets. And we got to do
something!
(LAUGHTER)
LARRY DAVID: And we
got to do it now.
(LAUGHTER)
LARRY DAVID: Ehh.
GWEN IFILL: Ehh.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: That's Larry David
from "Curb Your Enthusiasm"
doing a spot-on Bernie Sanders.
AMY WALTER: I think we need him
to be on the trail now 24/7. In
fact, if we could get Larry
David and Tina Fey as Sarah
Palin, put them on the road, I
think that would be a big hit.
TAMARA KEITH: It would sell a
lot of tickets. It would be
huge.
GWEN IFILL: It would be huge.
Bernie Sanders himself, who did
reasonably well at this debate.
Even though Hillary Clinton
did well, he also didn't do
poorly for himself. He benefits
from getting the opportunity to
show off his sense of humor,
because he seems like a really
cranky guy sometimes.
AMY WALTER: Well, and what he
highlighted, Larry David did, in
this 'Saturday Night Live"
skit, was his ability, Bernie
Sanders' ability to win over
younger voters. Right?
Here is this guy who is in his
70s. And he has the Larry David
mannerisms and all of
this. And yet it's young people
who are attracted to him.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
AMY WALTER: He's like, get off
my lawn, but don't you love me?
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Well, a
lot of people to.
AMY WALTER: Exactly.
GWEN IFILL: And that is what
Hillary Clinton is also worried
about.
Tamara Keith.
Amy Walter, happy
birthday to you.
AMY WALTER: Thank you very much.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first,
hundreds of thousands of
Volkswagen and Audi owners have
been left
in the dark about what to do
after learning their
diesel-fueled cars are emitting
up to
40 times the amount of nitrogen
oxide allowed by the federal
government.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
takes a look at the reaction in
Portland, Oregon. It is
taking a lead role in a
multistate investigation of
Volkswagen, and has the most
affected vehicles,
per capita, of any
state in the country.
CAT WISE: Gourmet meats are
sizzling, and business is brisk
at the Lardo sandwich shop
in one of Portland's hip new
neighborhoods. Owner Rick
Gencarelli is a true Portlander,
carefully sourcing the food in
his restaurant and driving an
ecologically friendly car.
At least, he thought he was
driving an ecologically friendly
car until last month. That's
when
he and 500,000 other U.S. owners
of Volkswagen and Audi's
so-called clean diesel cars
learned
they had been duped.
RICK GENCARELLI, Owner, Lardo:
You're trying to make the right
decision for the environment,
and then it turns out that its
30 or 40 times the allowed
amount of emissions, which is
-- that's just completely
heartbreaking.
CAT WISE: Gencarelli says he was
already starting to feel guilty
driving his 2011 Jetta TDI
after the news broke. Then he
discovered a note left by an
anonymous person on the
windshield
that read in part: "Your car is
currently polluting at rates
higher than nearly any
modern gasoline car today, two
to four times more than a Chevy
Suburban, not to mention
that V.W. lied to
you and the public.
RICK GENCARELLI: I feel
horrible. Like, I want to just
wear a mask because I feel like
I'm being judged so harshly. The
note kindly says that I should
consider a new car, but
then what do I do with this one?
It's still going to be on the
road.
CAT WISE: In fact, many V.W.
owners in Portland and around
the country are wondering what
to do. Volkswagen has yet to
reveal plans for fixing the
emissions problems, and vehicle
values are dropping amid the
uncertainty. Nationally, more
than 250 lawsuits have been
filed against Volkswagen and
more are likely as states, car
dealers, and consumers grapple
with the long-term implications
of the company's fraud.
One of those filing suit is
Jamie Saul, a Portland
environmental law professor and
a
dad in a busy household. Saul
and his wife, Alex, have been
big fans of the newer Volkswagen
diesel vehicles. They have owned
two and convinced several family
members to buy them as well.
But now Jamie is part of a
class-action lawsuit against the
company filed in a California
federal court.
We caught up with Jamie as he
was heading out for his morning
commute in his family's
Jetta TDI SportWagen.
So, tell me about that day that
you heard the news. What was
your reaction?
JAMIE SAUL, Volkswagen Car
Owner: I was shocked. I was
shocked and disappointed at
Volkswagen.
It's one of the few major
corporations that I thought was
really trying to do the right
thing. There are a lot of
late-model TDIs in our
neighborhood and in Portland
generally,
because I think consumers in
Portland like the idea of having
a fuel-efficient, clean
car that's fun to drive and
practical for their family
needs.
CAT WISE: Saul and his wife are
now trying to drive less, and
ride their bikes to work
more often, but that's a big
hassle when they have to get the
kids around town. They'd like
to sell the car, but who would
buy it and at what price?
JAMIE SAUL: I think the people
who own these cars need to be
compensated for the lost value
in the cars on the secondary
market. And they need a
real-world fix that solves the
problem,
while not undermining the fuel
economy and the performance of
these cars.
CAT WISE: While owners have been
struggling, Volkswagen
dealerships are also feeling the
pain. The company has told
dealers to stop selling their
inventory of diesel vehicles,
which typically account for
about 20 percent of sales.
But Volkswagen is reportedly
reimbursing U.S. dealers for
expenses they incur during the
scandal. We reached out to
Portland area Volkswagen
dealerships, but none would
agree to speak
with us on camera. Nationwide,
sales of V.W.s are expected to
take a significant hit. But
the emissions scandal isn't just
impacting new car dealers. It's
also having a big impact
in the used car market.
MONTY KING, President, Oregon
Vehicle Dealers Association: The
values are just dropping
like a rock.
CAT WISE: Monty King is
president of the Oregon Vehicle
Dealers Association and
represents
used car and truck dealerships.
MONTY KING: The dealers are very
concerned, because they're small
business people. And
if they had bought one of these
V.W.s at the auction or even
taken it as a trade-in, and
now because of this, the value
drops, say, $500 or 1,000,
they're going to take the loss.
I think V.W. is
responsible for that.
CAT WISE: King says independent
used car dealers aren't
expecting the same level of
support
as V.W. dealerships.
MONTY KING: There's 120,000 used
car dealers in the United
States. And if every one of
them has one of these, what do
you think the chances are of
V.W. helping? I'm not real
excited about that possibility.
CAT WISE: One of the big
questions on many V.W. owners'
minds here in Portland is, can
they still legally
drive their car?
Oregon, like 29 other states,
has a vehicle emissions testing
program in several cities.
The goal is to improve air
quality by making sure vehicles
are properly maintained and
not emitting pollutants that
exhaust systems are designed to
catch.
GERRY PRESTON, Oregon Department
of Environmental Quality: I know
it seems to be out there that
vehicles, if you own these,
you're going to fail. And that's
just not the case.
CAT WISE: Gerry Preston is in
charge of the vehicle inspection
program for Oregon's Department
of Environmental Quality. He
says that impacted V.W. diesel
cars won't automatically fail
the required biannual test. The
state is waiting for a recall to
happen, and then owners will
be expected to get
those repairs made.
GERRY PRESTON: We certainly care
about the issue, and we know
that nitrogen oxide, the
component that we're talking
about, can cause problems with
asthma, emphysema, and
bronchitis,
and things like that, so we're
very concerned about that.
However, we're letting EPA take
the role, as are most states, to
let the recall process take its
form, and then after that,
when they come back in, if they
haven't gotten the recall done,
then we will be looking at
that.
CAT WISE: For now, Jamie Saul
and many others are waiting for
news about that recall expected
in the next few months.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Cat Wise in Portland, Oregon.
GWEN IFILL: A lot of boys dream
of growing up, and girls too,
playing for the NBA.
Caron Butler was one of the
lucky ones. He had the dream and
the skills to get him there.
But he nearly threw it all away,
turning to a life of violence,
drug dealing and eventually
prison.
William Brangham has our latest
addition to the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf, Butler's "Tuff Juice:
My Journey from the Streets
to the NBA." MD-Iö
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To see him now
on the court, you would have
little sense of how far Caron
Butler has come. This 14-year
veteran of the NBA Has played
with and for some of
basketball's
greats. But this career
almost never happened.
Growing up in a poor part of
Racine, Wisconsin, Butler
starting dealing cocaine at age
11,
bought a gun at 12, and soon was
posing for pictures with stacks
of his drug money. In
prison at 15, Butler vowed that,
when he got out, he would
change. He got a job at Burger
King, and rededicated
himself to basketball.
But 17 years ago, those plans
nearly fell apart. If it wasn't
for the snap judgment
of this man, Detective Rick
Geller, Caron Butler might have
gone right back to prison
and his career would
have never happened.
I talked with them both
recently in our studio.
Rick Geller, Caron Butler,
thanks for being here.
CARON BUTLER, Author, "Tuff
Juice: My Journey from the
Streets to the NBA": Thanks for
having
us.
SGT. RICK GELLER (RET.), Racine,
Wisconsin, Police Department:
Thanks for having us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Take me back
17 years ago to the day you guys
first met. Tell me that
story.
SGT. RICK GELLER: I had drafted
a search warrant for the Bluff
Avenue House that Caron was
living at, at that time. Caron
had a criminal history, a very
lengthy criminal history.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, you
thought you were going to break
into this House, and you're
going to bust a drug dealer?
SGT. RICK GELLER: That's
exactly what I thought.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And
what did you find?
SGT. RICK GELLER: We ended up
finding 15.3 grams of crack
cocaine in the garage area.
There was a lot of incidentals
that just didn't make sense to
me. Like, for instance, I had
a chance to talk to him inside
the house. He had burns on his
hands.
And I asked him, "Where did
you get burns on your hands?"
"From working at Burger King."
We pat him down and he's got $11
in his pocket. Not consistent
with what a dope dealer normally
would be carrying. It just
didn't match up, I guess. I felt
like he was one of those people
in the wrong place
at the wrong time.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, on this
day that you make a decision
that he is, in fact, innocent
and that the drugs you found in
the house were not his, that's a
pretty monumental decision,
right?
CARON BUTLER: Definitely.
I mean, it changed my life. It
changed everything. It was a
decision that really altered my
whole
life.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because let's
say it had gone the other way.
Let's say he said: I'm
going to book you. I don't
believe you when you say that
that's not your -- those are
not your drugs in the garage.
What would have happened to you?
CARON BUTLER: Because of my past
already, and my lengthy record,
I could have been facing
10 to 15 years. I would be 26,
25 years old getting out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Career is over.
CARON BUTLER: You know, all
those dreams of playing
basketball or doing all these
things
would be gone.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's go back
a little bit in time. Obviously,
as you mentioned, you
did have a very lengthy record.
You had spent a good deal of
time in the drug trade. I'm
curious, what is it that
drew you to that trade?
CARON BUTLER: I would have to
say, you know, from a youngster,
the second I jumped off
the porch, you know, and that is
the second that I started
experiencing things in the
neighborhood, I was exposed
to materialistic things.
I saw guys riding around in the
nice cars with gold rims on it,
the Cadillacs, the 98s
and the Buicks and the gold
chains and the jewelry, and had
the money and the flash.
You know, it was just something
that I was intrigued by as a
youngster.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And those were
guys who were not working at the
manufacturing plant.
CARON BUTLER: No, they wasn't
working a 9:00 to 5:00. They was
working around the clock.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, by the
time you two have this meeting
17 years ago, you had spent
some time in prison. You had
decided to turn your life
around. What was it that changed
your mind?
CARON BUTLER: It was a
combination of things, one, some
of my closest friends that I
lost
to the streets. And, two, I felt
like a huge disappointment to my
mother, who worked two
jobs and did everything
that she possibly can do.
SGT. RICK GELLER: That, to me, I
think, was the biggest factor,
because his mom really
was, for one, working two or
three jobs, plus trying to keep
a handle on him.
And, I mean, she would go out to
the park that we were talking
about, the 18th Street
Mall, or...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is where
all the drug trade was going on.
SGT. RICK GELLER: Yes, where all
the drug trafficking -- she
would get out of her car
and chase him down.
CARON BUTLER: Chase
me off the street.
SGT. RICK GELLER: But she just
couldn't do it all the time.
CARON BUTLER: Yes.
SGT. RICK GELLER: And he got
better and better and better.
And I think when he finally got
sent to Ethan Allen,
and his mom...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is
the correctional facility.
SGT. RICK GELLER: Correct.
When he finally was sent there,
and his mom was trailing behind,
hoping and praying that
the car that she has will
continue to work, the tears are
rolling down her face, I mean,
I think that was it for him. I
really do. I think that was a --
the shining moment.
CARON BUTLER: I really did feel
like a huge disappointment, just
because I knew what she
invested in me.
And for me to, you know, throw
that all away and be in
corrections, and her having to
live
with that void of me not being
there, that was frustrating. So
it was just -- it was
all those things, and my mom
moving out my old neighborhood,
so when I got out, I was
in a new environment. So I
didn't feel like I had to live
up to that -- the norm or the
expectations of my former self.
I felt like I had a fresh start.
And people started showing me a
lot of favor, putting
me in some situations to be
successful. And I took full
advantage of it.
SGT. RICK GELLER: In Caron's
case, too, there wasn't a real
father figure.
CARON BUTLER: No.
SGT. RICK GELLER: There was a
great mother figure, but not
really a father figure. So
I think it finally came -- he
came to the conclusion, either I
keep hurting my mom,
or I end up dead, or I end up in
prison for a long, long time.
And I think he just decided
it wasn't worth it.
And I'm so glad he did. And I
will tell you something. As far
as that father figure, he
has, without hesitation, become
the father that he always hoped
for with his kids. So,
I think that is...
CARON BUTLER: Appreciate that.
SGT. RICK GELLER: You bet.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The book is
"Tuff Juice: My Journey from the
Streets to the NBA."
Caron Butler, Rick Geller, thank
you both very much for being
here.
CARON BUTLER: Thanks
for having us.
SGT. RICK GELLER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: During the
military dictatorship in
Argentina, from 1976 to 1983, as
many as
30,000 people simply
disappeared. Some of those were
young pregnant women. An
estimated
500 of their babies were then
given to couples who were often
deemed sympathetic to the
regime.
What happened to those women and
their babies is explored by the
documentary project Retro
Report and distributed by The
New York Times. We're partnering
with them to bring you a
version of this piece here.
MAN: three-man military junta
has taken over the government of
Argentina.
NARRATOR: The coup began in the
early morning hours of March 24,
1976.
MAN: The action was swift and
efficient, and the new ruling
junta composed of coup leaders
seemed in firm control.
NARRATOR: It wasn't long before
the military dictatorship
started rounding up guerrilla
groups and those believed to
be left-wing subversives.
Housewife and school principal
Estela de Carlotto was 47 years
old back in November of 1977
when her 22-year-old daughter,
Laura, disappeared.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO, Grandmother
(through translator): She was
the first of my four children.
Laura
was a very respectful girl, but
with a strong personality. She
became politically active
because she wanted change.
NARRATOR: Carlotto says she was
frantic to find out what had had
happened to her daughter.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): At that time I was
the same as other mothers,
very naive. We didn't know that
the military were coming to kill
people. We were expecting
the return of our children.
NARRATOR: But it wasn't to be.
Carlotto would never hear from
her daughter Laura again.
In August of 1978, she was
killed by her captors. Although
devastated, Estela de Carlotto
was
one of the more fortunate ones.
She was given her daughter's
body to bury. It was two years
later that she learned something
she had suspected: Laura had
been pregnant and given birth to
a son before she was murdered.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): I buried Laura. I
knew where Laura was. But
I didn't know where
my grandson was.
NARRATOR: Not long after, she
joined the grandmothers, or
abuelas, of the Plaza de Mayo.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): Being on my own was
dangerous. I couldn't share
my sorrow. So, to find the
grandmothers was to find
company, to exchange ideas and
to
look after one another.
NARRATOR: The dictatorship
lasted seven years. During that
time, as many as 30,000 people
were tortured and killed at
detention camps all over the
country. Many of the victims
were buried in mass graves.
After the regime fell, the
grandmothers were desperate to
not only find out what had
happened
to their children, but to also
recover their grandchildren, who
had been stolen at birth.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): In the beginning,
we were searching, but we didn't
have a way to prove which
were our grandchildren.
NARRATOR: So they turned to
science. And, in 1987, they
began storing their profiles
in a newly created national
genetic bank. By May of 2014,
Estela de Carlotto and the
grandmothers had found or
identified 113 missing
grandchildren.
And, at the age of 83, her
determination seemed stronger
than ever.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): I will never stop
doing what I do, because there
is inside a very powerful
strength that is love, love for
our children and grandchildren.
IGNACIO HURBAN, Grandson of
Estela de Carlotto (through
translator): I first heard of
grandmothers
and of Estela de Carlotto when I
graduated from secondary school
and went to study in
a music conservatory.
NARRATOR: Ignacio Hurban was
born in June of 1978, at the
height of the dictatorship.
His parents were farmers near
the city Olavarria, some 220
miles from Buenos Aires. On his
36th
birthday in 2014, Ignacio found
out that he had been adopted.
IGNACIO HURBAN (through
translator): It was a shock,
yes. The parents who raised me
didn't
tell me. When I asked them, they
confirmed what I had been told.
NARRATOR: Not long after his
discovery, Ignacio went to the
grandmothers, who arranged for
a blood test. In August of 2014,
just days after taking the test,
Ignacio got the results
from the head of the commission.
IGNACIO HURBAN (through
translator): She told me whose
grandchild I was and that my
grandmother
was waiting for me, very
excited. We met immediately, the
next day.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): Given his good
nature and nice character, he
said,
in jest, of course, "If I'm a
grandson of the grandmothers, I
hope Estela is my grandmother."
He seemed to have sensed it.
NARRATOR: Yuki Goni is an
author and journalist.
YUKI GONI, Journalist: The
country came together, I think,
in this huge cry of joy. I went
to
the press conference where she
appeared publicly with him for
the first time, and there's a
room packed full of journalists
all in tears, myself included,
because she represented so
much for us.
I mean, she had been so brave.
She had put so much of herself
at stake. And, finally,
she had her reward.
NARRATOR: But it also meant
something else: Her grandson's
adoptive parents would face
a legal investigation.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): The people who
raised my grandson committed a
crime. It's a serious crime, a
crime against humanity. There
are extenuating circumstances,
in that they were farm people
under a very domineering master,
who one day brought them
a child and told them, do not
ask questions and never tell him
he is not your own son.
I personally do not blame them
or exonerate them. That is in
the hands of the justice
system.
NARRATOR: Ignacio Hurban is now
Ignacio Montoya Carlotto.
Although he has changed his
name,
he says his bond with the
parents who raised him remains
strong, and he is proud to be
the 114th grandchild identified.
At the age of 84, Estela de
Carlotto shows no sign of
slowing down, taking her message
and now her grandson
around the world.
IGNACIO HURBAN (through
translator): There is my public
life with my grandmother and
my private and emotional life
with her, a life we're building.
In that sense, it's just
a grandchild and a grandmother.
ESTELA DE CARLOTTO (through
translator): When I met my
grandson, I could hug him. He
doesn't
look like his mother, but I knew
that in his blood was my
daughter Laura. And it was like
I got her back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch the
full documentary by Retro
Report, "The Disappeared," on
The
New York Times Web site.
That's nytimes.com.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight:
Yo-Yo Ma and his acclaimed
career. He's been on the stage
since a very early age.
Now, as Jeffrey Brown found when
he visited him in New York
recently, the renowned cellist's
taking time in his latest work
to incorporate personal
milestones and reflections.
JEFFREY BROWN: In their new
album, Yo-Yo Ma and longtime
collaborator and friend Kathryn
Stott have used the music of
cherished composers, Bach,
Brahms, Gershwin and others, to
create
a kind of soundtrack of change,
love and loss. It's called
"Songs From the Arc of Life."
YO-YO MA, Cellist: What do
people remember from their
childhood, music from their
childhood?
What do people go through when
they are teenagers, or what do
they go through when they're in,
you know, adolescence, or middle
age, or you know, late age? We
have two "Ave Maria"s,
the miracle of birth, the
infinitude of death.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yo-Yo Ma was born
in Paris to musician parents and
moved to New York
when he was 5. He'd begun cello
lessons a year earlier, and by
8, he and his violinist
sister had performed on national
television in a concert
featuring Leonard Bernstein and
other major figures.
Over the years, he's turned out
some 90 albums, a classical
music star who's also recorded
a wide variety of music from
this country and around the
world with a who's-who of
musicians
from other genres. He's appeared
before presidents, received the
Presidential Medal of Freedom
and the National Medal of Arts,
and the true sign of cultural
importance, made a cameo
on "Sesame Street."
ACTOR: Man, that is
one mellow cello.
JEFFREY BROWN: All of this
before he turned 60 this month.
And between his birthday and
several musical anniversaries,
when we met at a recording
studio in New York recently,
I found him ready to
ponder his own life's arc.
YO-YO MA: I think my path was a
little circuitous, because I was
born into a musical family,
and so music was there. And so I
felt like I never chose to go
into music, because that's
just what I did.
And the accidental parts, you
know, my moving from France to
the United States because my
father got a job in New York,
that was an accident. I think,
if I were growing up somewhere
else, my life would have
turned out very differently.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, surely, so
much work goes into making you
the musician you are and the
life that you had, and the kind
of commitment and drive. That
goes beyond the accidental.
YO-YO MA: Absolutely. I can be
incredibly focused, and, you
know, incredibly willful
and stubborn, and -- but I think
I also want to figure out what
it's about.
Yes, it takes a lot of focus. It
takes those 10,000 hours to do
something, but it's like,
how does it fit in within
the context of living?
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the major
projects of Ma's life connects
music from different ages
and cultures. He created the
Silk Road Ensemble 15 years ago,
its name chosen for the ancient
China-to-Europe trade route.
We sat in as the collective,
comprising many nationalities,
worked on a composition by
Syrian clarinetist Kinan
Azmeh titled "The Wedding."
Ma says much of his own world
view, embodied in this effort to
blend sounds and cultures,
is shaped by his immigrant past.
YO-YO MA: And with everything
that's happening now, you know,
the refugee situation,
immigration
situation, I'm an immigrant.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
YO-YO MA: Je suis
immigrant, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: But it's striking
to me -- and I'm wondering if it
hits you -- it must -- that
even as this sort of era of
globalization, where there's
much more communication, and
at the same time more tribalism,
more xenophobia, more tensions
around the world.
YO-YO MA: Those are the
reactions that fear produces.
Rather than get depressed when
change occurs, you could, you
know, where -- what would be
the opposite of fear? I would
say it's hope. I have also spent
quite a lot of time thinking,
well, you know, what can I do
between 60 and 70 that may be
useful?
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what does
that mean in your case?
YO-YO MA: I think, from my
perspective, I get more and more
pleasure seeing other people
doing things and succeeding. And
I don't feel like I have to do
this and that in order to
prove something.
JEFFREY BROWN: What has been the
purpose or the goal for you that
music gives you?
YO-YO MA: It's a friend, a
friend in need. It is -- it
gives joy. It gives solace.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, I have
seen you play so many times, and
now I get to ask you this.
When you close your eyes, and
you kind of -- you know, your
head kind of goes back off,
and then you're -- sometimes
there's this smile on your face,
are you thinking at that
moment? Are you experiencing?
What's going on inside you while
you're playing?
YO-YO MA: It's a process of
figuring out, what are the
priorities that need to be
communicated?
So, basically, the most
important thing is that
something someone cared about,
whether
it's a piece of music someone
wrote or something that I'm
playing, the content of
which actually passes on to
somebody, and lives in somebody
else. I think that's where
age makes a difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: In September at
Royal Albert Hall in London,
Yo-Yo Ma gave himself a rather
unusual 60th birthday present.
He performed all six of Bach's
solo cello suites, still
considered the pinnacle of
composition for his instrument.
It's an enormous challenge.
YO-YO MA: It's a physical
check-in, because I have never
actually done them pretty much
-- pretty much all in a row
without breaks. But it's also a
check-in in terms of where
you are in life in terms of
focus. And the question is, have
I learned enough to be able
to do this with total dedication
and focus? Can you -- can I pull
it off?
JEFFREY BROWN: And the results
were? Are you a better musician
now?
YO-YO MA: No, I'm not sure that
I'm better at anything, but I
think I feel that I can
still contribute.
You just keep learning.
Keep on trucking.
JEFFREY BROWN: Alright,
Yo-Yo Ma, thanks so much.
YO-YO MA: Thank you, Jeffrey.
GWEN IFILL: Yo-Yo Ma played part
of "Quartet From
the End of Time" for us.
You can see that on
our Art Beat page
at PBS.org/NewsHour.